
---PAGE 1---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
PHYSICS  
 
 
Paper 9702 /12 
Multiple Choice  
 
 
Question 
Number  Key  Question 
Number  Key  Question 
Number  Key  Question 
Number  Key 
1 D  11 C  21 B  31 C 
2 D  12 D  22 A  32 A 
3 C  13 D  23 D  33 C 
4 A  14 A  24 C  34 B 
5 A  15 B  25 B  35 C 
6 C  16 A  26 A  36 B 
7 B  17 B  27 C  37 B 
8 B  18 A  28 C  38 B 
9 A  19 D  29 C  39 D 
10 A  20 D  30 D  40 D 
 
 
General comments  
 
It is important to carefully read the text of the question before considering the answer options.   
 
In numerical questions, candidates should be careful to consider S I prefixes and powers of ten, as well as 
possible unit conversions, and should be encouraged to check to their answers to ensure they are a sensible 
magnitude.  
 
Candidates had particular difficulty resolving vectors into perpendicular components.  Candidates should be 
able to select the correct trigonometric function for each problem and should be familiar with the inverse 
trigonometric functions.  
 
In general, candidates found Questions  5, 8, 23 and 36 relatively difficult.   
 
Candidates found Questions  1, 22, 34 and 40 relatively easy.  
 
 
Comments on specific questions  
 
Question 3  
 
This was answered well by most candidates. A significant number of weaker candidates selected option A, 
neglecting to convert the velocity units from cm  s–1 to m  s–1. Option B was also a common incorrect response, 
suggesting that candidates were not considering the change  in velocity of the car. Candidates would benefit 
from more practice reading velocity -time graphs.  
 
---PAGE 2---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
Question 4  
 
Stronger candidates found this straightforward. The most common error among weaker candidates was to 
use the final velocity of the aircraft as 85  m s–1, rather than converting the 85  km  h–1 to 23.6  m s–1 leading to 
option C. A significant minority converted correctly then used the incorrect formula v2 = u2 + as, neglecting 
the factor of 2.  
 
Question 5  
 
This proved challenging for candidates, with all 4 options selected roughly equally indicating that the 
variation of speed in two dimensions without air resistance is not well understood by most candidates. The 
question is best approached by considering co nservation of energy. The projectile’s speed must decrease as 
it rises, as kinetic energy decreases and gravitational potential energy increases. As the projectile is still in 
motion at its highest point the speed cannot decrease to zero, ruling out option s C and D. The projectile then 
falls to its original height (ground level) so the speed must return to its original value, as the kinetic energy 
and gravitational potential energy return to their original values.  
 
Question 7  
 
Stronger candidates found this straightforward. The most common incorrect answer ( D) was the result of 
adding the magnitudes  of the correct components of momenta, neglecting that momentum is a vector 
quantity.   
 
Question 8  
 
Many candidates selected the incorrect options  A and C for this question, attempting to find another force 
acting on the astronaut, despite the question asking for the gravitational force acting on the astronaut. 
Candidates are encouraged to carefully read the question and not to assume the quantity that they are being 
asked to find.  
 
Question 11  
 
Stronger candidates found this straightforward. Weaker candidates selected option B most frequently, which 
is the result of swapping sine and cosine when resolving the force in the wire. Candidates should practice 
resolving forces so they can confidently select the correct trigonometric functions.  
 
Question 13  
 
All candidates found this equilibrium challenging. A and C were the least popular options, suggesting that 
most candidates recognised that F would not be zero in either scenario. Option B was the most popular 
incorrect answer , with candidates perhaps considering only the weight of the child and neglecting the weight 
of the beam.  
 
Question 15  
 
Stronger candidates found this straightforward. The problem is best solved by resolving the acceleration of 
free fall into a component in the direction of the slope.   
 
Candidates who found this presentation of the problem unfamiliar could still have made progress by 
recognising 19.6 = 2 g and relating this to v2 = u2 + 2as. 
 
Question 18  
 
Less  than half of the candidates selected the correct answer  A. The weakest candidates selected options  B 
and D. In D no energy is lost, suggesting that candidates struggled to visualise this problem. Option  B 
resulted from correctly determining the speed of the projectile at the maximum point compared with the initial 
speed then neglecting  that that kinetic energy is proportional to the speed squared.  
 
  
---PAGE 3---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
Question 21  
 
Approximately two thirds of candidates recognised that the elastic potential energy could be determined 
using values from, or the area under , the graph. Incorrect option  D, considering a single spring experiencing 
the whole 160  N force with extension 9.6  mm, was selected almost as often as the correct option  B. For the 
correct answer  candidates had to recognise that the four springs would share the 160  N force equally, and so 
each extends only 2.4  mm   
 
Question 23  
 
This question required simple factual recall of the approximate wavelength of infrared radiation in free space. 
Fewer than half of candidates could recall this information, suggesting that this point on the syllabus is not 
well known.  
 
Question 25  
 
This was answered correctly by most candidates. The topic of phase difference is often challenging, and 
here it was also combined with the wave speed equation, suggesting that candidates understood  this topic.  
 
Question 29  
 
This difficult question was answered correctly by half of the candidates, suggesting that diffraction grating 
problems are well understood by stronger candidates . Options  A (the diffraction angle for the first order 
maximum) and B (the difference between the second and first order maxima) were equally popular. 
Candidates are encouraged to carefully read the question to ensure they are calculating the correct quantity.  
 
Question 32  
 
Option B was a very popular incorrect answer  with nearly a third of candidates selecting it. Candidate s 
choosing B perhaps confused the resistance against temperature profile of a thermistor with the required 
power against temperature profile. Candidates can reason that in this circuit the p.d. across the thermistor is 
constant, and recall that the resistance of the t hermistor decreases with temperature. Candidates who 
therefore considered P = V2/R could identify option A as the correct answer . 
 
Question 36  
 
Candidates found this  question  challenging. Candidates who recognised that V represent s the terminal p.d. 
and that with an open circuit this would be equal to the e.m.f. selected the correct option  B. Option  D was the 
most popular, with candidates confusing the concept of terminal p.d. and e.m.f.. Option  A was also popular, 
with candidates perhaps neglecting that the measurement of V would include the e.m.f. . Candidates would 
benefit from practicing problems involving sources with internal resistance, and from practical experience of 
working with this kind of circuit.  
 
Question 38  
 
This question on conservation of momentum was answered well by most candidates.  
 
Question 39  
 
Around two thirds of candidates correctly answered this factual recall question. The most common incorrect 
answer was option  B, indicating that students are not confident distinguishing between + and – decay. The 
weakest candidates selected B, C and D equally, suggesting that the difference between quarks and 
antiquarks was not well understood.  
 
---PAGE 4---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
PHYSICS  
 
 
Paper 9702 /22 
AS Level Structured Questions  
 
 
Key messages  
 
Candidates should explicitly state the subject of any numerical or algebraic equations they use. This is 
especially important where more than one equation is used in a question, and when equations are stated 
and then re -arranged. In some questions marks can be scored for correct statements of physical equations, 
but only where the whole equation is clearly shown. Candid ates should not rely on the examiner to infer a 
subject for an expression given in the working.  
 
Candidates should pay attention to the units and powers of ten in which information is presented, and ensure 
that they are converting answers into SI base units where appropriate.  
 
Candidates should ensure that reasoning done with equations in the margins of written questions or in 
diagrams is then transferred to a written answer, rather than relying on the examiner to interpret the working.  
Candidates are also reminded to present t heir working within the space provided.  
 
Candidates are reminded to be careful when making comparisons in written questions to be clear what is 
being referred to. For example when comparing times for two objects R and S, a candidate stating “the time 
is greater” could be referring to either objec t and so has not answered the question. Candidates should also 
be careful when using terms describing change such as ‘decrease ’ and ‘increase ’ as it is not always clear 
whether that change is occurring with respect to time or some other variable.  
 
 
General comments  
 
There was no evidence that candidates were short of time for this examination.  
 
Concepts of uncertainty were not generally well understood. The difference between absolute and 
percentage uncertainty proved challenging for many, as did the concept of an uncertainty expressing a range 
of possible values.  
 
Candidates frequently gave answers to 1 sf, when data in the question was given to 2 sf. Candidates should 
always consider how many significant figures are appropriate for their answer in the context of the data 
given.  
 
Most candidates answered questions involving the recall and use of formulae well. Definitions were not 
always well known, and many either missed out key words or used wording which changed the meaning of 
the definition.  
 
Many candidates showed little working to support their answers to numerical questions, and the working was 
often poorly presented. Correct working, where present, allows marks to be scored for good methods even 
where errors then occur.  
 
Candidates could improve by ensuring they always write a subject for their algebraic or numerical 
expressions.  
 
Candidates found 1(b)(i) , 2(b)(i) , 3(a), 6(b)(i)  and 7(a) relatively easy. They found 1(b)(iii) , 2(a), 3(b)(iii) , 
4(a), 5(b) and 6(c)(i)  difficult.   
 
 
  
---PAGE 5---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
Comments on specific questions  
 
Question 1  
 
(a)  The vast majority of candidates gave an acceptable explanation of accuracy. A small number of 
candidates inappropriately explained what was meant by the precision of a set of measured values. 
Very weak candidates sometimes thought that the accuracy was ind icated by the number of 
significant figures or the number decimal places in the measured value.  
 
(b) (i) The majority of candidates gave a correct equation for density, although candidates sometimes 
used ‘ d’ instead of ‘’ for density. There was a significant number of candidates that made errors 
converting the mass in grams into kilograms and the length from centimetres into metres.  
 
 (ii) The stronger candidates were able to obtain the correct percentage uncertainty. There were many 
that did not recognise the need to multiply the percentage uncertainty in the volume by three. Some 
candidates incorrectly multiplied the percentage uncertaint y in mass by three . 
 
  The weakest candidates  gave an incorrect method, such as treating the absolute uncertainties as 
percentage uncertainties.  
 
 (iii) This was a challenging question . The strongest candidates were able to describe how the 
uncertainties in the values of density allowed for an overlap between the two ranges, and hence 
that the cubes could be made from the same material.  
 
  Successful candidates typically found the range of densities for one cube, and demonstrated that 
the given value of density for the other cube fell within this range, but there were other valid 
explanations given.  
 
  Many  candidates recognised that the values of density were ‘close ’ or ‘similar ’ to each other but did 
not explicitly identify an overlap.  
 
  Many candidates stated that the cubes could not be made from the same material because the 
uncertainties for the two cubes were different or that the value quoted for the density was different 
for the two cubes. This indicates a lack of understanding tha t a calculated value and its uncertainty 
shows a range of possible values.  
 
Question 2  
 
(a)  There were very few fully correct answers. The candidates usually referred to the total clockwise 
moments being equal to the total anticlockwise moments. However, many candidates did not 
explicitly state that these moments are about the same point. It was also common for weaker 
candidates to omit ‘total’ from their answer.  
 
  Only the stronger candidates stated that this was for an object in rotational equilibrium. Sometimes, 
reference was made to a ‘closed system’ or an ‘isolated system’, possibly due to confusion 
between the principle of moments and the principle of conservat ion of momentum. Very weak 
candidates sometimes stated only what was meant by the moment of a force.  
 
  Candidates should be able to recall core principles from the syllabus.  
 
(b) (i) This part was generally well answered with many candidates obtaining the correct answer. Nearly 
all candidates could correctly determine one or two moment s, but a significant number could not 
give all three moments. A common mistake was to think that the moment of the weight of the beam 
about end A was either (1700  6.0) N  m or (1700  5.0) N  m. 
 
 (ii) The majority of candidates equated the upthrust with the weight of the cylinder and the force of the 
beam on the cylinder. Some candidates did not give the required full working for the weight, 
jumping directly to weight = 100  N without explanation. Weaker candidates tried to use the given 
equation for the upthrust ( F = gV) without success.  
 
 (iii) The stronger  candidates used the expression for the upthrust and a correct expression for the 
volume of a cylinder to determine the length y. A significant number used the force from the beam 
---PAGE 6---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
(1300 N) and not the upthrust given (1400  N). Some candidates confused pressure with force and 
so wrongly stated that 1400 = 990  9.81  y. Others misused the density equation by confusing 
the mass of the cylinder with the mass of displaced water, stating that 990 = 11  / (p  0.392  y). 
 
  Many candidates showed a correct calculation, but then inappropriately expressed their final 
answer to only 1 sf. The calculation uses data that has 2 sf and so it was expected that the final 
answer would also be expressed to 2 sf.   
 
 (iv) It was generally understood that the graph line would have a positive gradient. However, weaker 
candidates often made the mistake of drawing their graph line from the origin and did not 
appreciate that the graph would have a non -zero value of depth when the distance from A is zero, 
as there needs to be an upthrust due to the weight of the beam. Although the question explicitly 
stated the required range of distance for the graph, a small number of candidates drew lines that 
ended before 6.0 m.  
 
Question 3  
 
(a) (i) The majority of candidates calculated the acceleration using an appropriate equation of constant 
acceleration, indicating this subject is generally well understood. Weaker candidates often 
attempted to find a time using an inappropriate method such as t = 180/13 and so could make no 
progress.  
 
 (ii) This proved to be a straightforward calculation for many candidates. Weaker candidates were often 
able to correctly recall the symbol formula for the kinetic energy of an object. However, a common 
mistake was to calculate the gain in kinetic energy by using the expression  
1
2 m(v – u)2. A small 
number of candidates gave a value for kinetic energy at A or at B rather than the difference in 
energies. Candidates are encouraged to carefully read the question to ensure that they are 
calculating the required quantity.  
 
(b) (i) The majority of candidates gave the correct definition of force, often using the exact wording from 
the syllabus ‘rate of change of momentum ’. A significant number gave ‘mass times acceleration ’ 
which is a valid way to calculate the resultant force acting on an object, but is not the definition of 
force. Candidates should be able to recall the definitions of the key quantities within the syllabus.  
 
 (ii) There were a significant number  of errors made in this ‘show that ’ question. Candidates should 
ensure they begin with an explicit statement of the equation being used, including the subject. 
Candidates frequently omitted the powers of ten (104) in the first step of their working, or incorrectly 
gave their powers as 10-4 instead of 104. It was also common for candidates to substitute the 
values of momenta into their equation the wrong way around, leading to a positive final answer.  
 
  Incorrect intermediate answers were often corrected in the final answer.  
 
  Candidates are reminded that in a ‘show that ’ question, the working must be correct throughout.  
 
 (iii) Only a few candidates were able to provide a fully correct explanation . A large number of 
candidates incorrectly stated that as the force and momentum was the same for both trucks, the 
time to come to rest for both trucks would also be the same.  
 
  Very few candidates explained that truck S and truck R would have the same change  in momentum 
to come to rest.  
 
  Many candidates focussed on explaining that a decreasing force acted on truck R whereas a 
constant force acted on truck S, but did not actually compare the average  force acting on truck R to 
the average  force acting on truck S for the trucks to come to rest. Very few candidates tried to 
determine the value of the average force acting on truck R over the time it took to come to rest.  
 
  Many weaker candidates stated that the force on truck S was greater as the force was constant 
and the force on truck R varied. Some candidates seemed to simply guess that truck S would take 
less amount of time to come to rest and did not provide a correc t supporting explanation. Only a 
relatively small number of candidates realised that they could determine the value of the time taken 
for each truck to come to rest, either algebraically or from the graph . 
---PAGE 7---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
 
  Some candidates annotated the graph  but did not make reference to these annotations in their 
answer, and so it was not clear how this related to the question. Candidates are reminded to 
present their answer in the space provided.  
 
Question 4  
 
(a) (i) Full explanations were rarely seen, although many candidates were able to give a partial 
explanation. Some candidates described the reflection of the emitted wave by saying that it 
‘bounced off’ or ‘rebounded’ from the metal sheet, but did not actually use  the verb ‘reflect’. 
Candidates are reminded to use the correct technical terms when describing physical phenomena.  
 
  Other candidates explained that a stationary wave is formed by two waves travelling in opposite 
directions and superposing, but did not make it clear that these two waves were the initial wave 
moving towards the metal sheet and the wave that is reflected f rom it.  
 
  Many candidates seemed to confuse the production of a stationary wave with the production of a 
two-source interference pattern. This often led to incorrect comments about the phase difference 
between the two waves at nodes and antinodes. Many candidates incorrectly referred to maximum 
displacement instead of maximum amplitude at antinodes. Similarly, it was common to see 
incorrect references to minimum or zero displacement instead of minimum or zero amplitude at 
nodes.  
 
(b) (i) The majority of candidates correctly recalled c = f. Power -of-ten errors in th e recall of the speed of 
light or in converting GHz into Hz were common. Very weak candidates occasionally used c = 
330 m s–1. Another common error here was to round the correct answer 0.048  m to 0.05  m. As c is 
given in the data sheet to 3 sf and the frequency was given to 2 sf, a 2sf value for wavelength was 
expected.  
 
 (ii) Only a minority of candidates understood that the distance between P and Q was equal to a 
quarter of a wavelength. A common misconception was that this distance was equal to half of a 
wavelength.  
 
 (iii) This was generally well answered. A significant number of candidates explained that the distance 
would be the same as the wavelength was unchanged. The given fact that the frequency was 
unchanged meant that other candidates were able to explain that the i ntensity change was due 
only to an amplitude change and not a wavelength change. Some candidates stated only that the 
frequency had not changed (which was given in the question), but did not link this to the 
wavelength, and so could not score.  
 
Question 5  
 
(a)  The stronger candidates were able to calculate the time period from the CRO trace and then 
evaluate the wavelength of the sound. A significant number were unable to determine the time 
period using the time -base setting, often mis -reading the graph or faili ng to convert a correct 
reading to a period. Candidates frequently introduced a power -of-ten error of 100 when attempting 
to deal with the cm–1. Another common mistake was to simply use the time -base setting as the 
period of the wave.   
 
  Successful responses generally had clear a presentation and showed all the intermediate steps of 
the calculation. Candidates are reminded to state the subject of all equations as this made it easier 
to score some credit when the final numerical answer was incorrect. Poorly presented numerical 
working often scored no marks when the final answer was wrong. Candidates are reminded that 
the symbol for the period is T rather than t.   
 
(b)  Many candidates recognised that the loudspeaker was moving away. Many also gave correct 
explanations relating the increase in period to a decrease in frequency, although this was not 
required as the command for this question was ‘describe ’ not ‘explain ’. A small minority realised 
that the continuous increase in the period meant that the speed of the loudspeaker was increasing.   
 
---PAGE 8---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
  A very small number of candidates misinterpreted the question and thought that they were being 
asked to describe the motion of a loudspeaker in order to produce a sound wave and so talked 
about the loudspeaker vibrating or oscillating.  
 
Question 6  
 
(a)  The majority of candidates calculated the correct potential difference. Weaker candidates 
sometimes made a power -of-ten error when trying to convert the units of resistance from m  to . 
 
(b) (i) The majority of candidates gave the expression for the area in terms of the resistivity. The most 
common errors were with the powers of ten or rearranging the equation but generally this was well 
answered.  
 
 (ii) This was generally well answered. The weaker candidates seemed to be unaware of the meaning 
of the number density of charge carriers. Some candidates attempted to use v = I/nAq but could not 
make progress as v is not known. Some candidates used this equation with their answer to 6(b)(iii) 
but this was not credited, as a ‘circular calculation ’ is not valid in a ‘show that ’ question.  
 
 (iii) Stronger candidates found this straightforward. Most candidates realised that they could use 
I = nAqv , but the substitution often proved challenging. The most common mistake was to 
substitute the total number of charge carriers instead of the number density of charge carriers. 
Another mistake was to substitute the total charge of all the charge carriers i n the wire instead of 
the charge of a single charge carrier.  
 
(c) (i) This part of the question was challenging. Many candidates focussed on how the resistance of wire 
Q changes with its length instead of comparing the total resistance of wire Q with the total 
resistance of wire P. For example, there were many comments about  the resistance of wire Q at 
the end of radius r1 or at the end of radius r2 and how those values compared to one another or to 
the resistance of wire P.  
 
  Most candidates commented that the cross -sectional area of Q decreased (along its length).   
 
  Stronger candidates realised that the average cross -sectional area of Q is less than P, but very few 
candidates commented that Q would be longer than P. It was not unusual for candidates to think 
that the wires had the same length. The relationship of th e resistance of a wire to its length and 
area was generally well known.  
 
 (ii) Most  candidates realised that the graph line would start from a non -zero value of average drift 
speed when the distance from X was zero. However, a common misconception was that the 
average drift speed of the charge carriers would then decrease as the distance  from X increased. 
Although a significant number of candidates realised that the graph line would have a positive 
gradient, it was usually drawn as a straight line and only the very strong candidates were able to 
deduce that the graph line would have an increasing p ositive gradient.  
 
Question 7  
 
(a)  The majority of candidates gave the two correct values. The most common incorrect value of the 
nucleon number of Q was 218 and the most common incorrect value of the proton number of R 
was 90.  
 
(b)  The stronger candidates were able to apply the conservation of momentum to the correct nuclei in 
this decay. A common error was to use the proton number instead of the mass number for both 
particles. Many weaker candidates attempted to include particle Q and a ssigned it a non -zero 
speed, meaning they could make little progress. A significant number of the weakest candidates 
seemed unaware of how to apply the conservation of momentum in this situation.  
 
(c)  Very few candidates managed to give three quantities that are conserved. ‘Momentum’ and 
‘charge’ were the most common correct answers. ‘Mass’ and ‘energy’ were the most common 
incorrect answers. A small number of candidates scored a mark for mass -energy.  
  Very few candidates gave ‘nucleon number’ or ‘proton number’ despite having (usually correctly) 
applied the conservation of both quantities in  7(a).   
 
---PAGE 9---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
  Weak candidates sometimes gave ‘protons ’, ‘neutrons ’ or ‘electrons ’ without stating ‘number ’ and 
so could not score.  Very weak candidates offered types of radiation or flavours of quarks.  
 
---PAGE 10---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
PHYSICS  
 
 
Paper 9702 /33 
Advanced Practical Skills  
 
 
Key messages  
 
• Where possible, candidates should carry out practice experiments, similar to those examined in 
previous years. The importance of setting up apparatus in accordance with instructions and diagrams 
should  be emphasised.  For experiments of the type in Question 2 , suitable problems and suggestions 
for improvement for those experiments can be discussed.  
 
• Candidates should be given opportunities to practice drawing lines of best fit using 30 cm rulers, and 
should check the appropriateness of the lines they produce.  
 
• Candidates should be given clear advice regarding the resolution of measuring instruments and the 
correct precision of recorded values, distinguishing this from significant figures in calculated values. The 
number of decimal places in a measured value shou ld never be forced to give the number of significant 
figures consistent with a calculated value.  
 
• In Question 2 , candidates should be advised to concentrate on measured values and should follow the 
advice in the question, in this case ‘state the quantity being measured and a reason for the uncertainty .’ 
Comments regarding the suitability of apparatus, rather than the method of use, are less likely to get 
credit.  
 
• Candidates should be encouraged to write clearly and carefully, particularly for numbers and units. 
Candidates should recognise where  units should be included on answer lines.  
 
 
General comments  
 
The general standard of the work done by the candidates was good, and there were many excellent scripts. 
Candidates demonstrated good skills in the generation and handling of data but improvements could be 
made to the analysis and evaluation of experiments.  
 
Candidates did not seem to be short of time and both questions were attempted in full by almost all the 
candidates. There was a small number of candidates with no response in Question 1(d) and (e), but with 
Question 2  fully answered; candidates should be reminded that they are only allowed access to apparatus 
for each question for one hour and should allocate their time to each question accordingly.  
 
In general, centres had little difficulty in providing the specified apparatus. Some centres provided an 
alternative pipe material in Question 2 and candidates were not disadvantaged by this.  Where a centre has 
a problem with providing the apparatus required, they should note this in their supervisor’s report.  
 
It is important that centres provide measuring apparatus with the correct resolution. Candidates from some 
centres record ed results consistent with an ammeter reading to 0.01  A in Question 1 , rather than a 
milliammeter.  
 
 
  
---PAGE 11---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
Comments on specific questions  
 
Question 1  
 
Most candidates were able to complete this question and to obtain good quality results, within the ranges 
expected. For some candidates the scatter of results was greater than to be expected from an electrical 
experiment and candidates should be advised to  check the readings for any points off -trend.  
 
(a)  The value of x was almost always in range but many candidates did not convert their milliamp 
readings into amps. Candidates often used the correct unit of mA in their table so should be 
advised to always check the consistency of units used.  
 
(b)  Most candidates were able to obtain the required six sets of values, with the correct trend.  
 
  There were some candidates who only increased (or decreased) their x-values from the starting 
value of approximately 0.45  m in (a) and so there were many who did not cover the full range of 
values. Centres were asked to provide one of the connecting leads with a length of 1  m to ensure 
that the full range was available to candidates. Candidates should be reminded that the widest 
possible range of the independent variable should be used . In this case , candidates should be able 
to have x-values from close t o zero to over 90  cm, but allowance was made to accommodate 
centres with slightly shorter connecting leads.  
    
  It was common for x values to be given to the nearest centimetre, as candidates were choosing 
where to connect their crocodile clips to the wire. Candidates need to be advised to always use the 
resolution of the measuring instrument used; in this case x values can be to the nearest millimetre, 
as that was the resolution specified in the confidential instructions.  
    
  Significant figures and calculations were mainly correct.  
    
  Column headings were largely correct . Some candidates either omitted the units  for 1/ I or 
incorrectly  gave them  as A. The incorrect expression 1/I / A– (a superscript negative sign without 
any number) was encountered several times from different centres.  
    
(c) (i) Many candidates gained credit for drawing appropriate axes, with labels and sensible scales 
covering at least half the graph grid, and plotting their six points accurately. There w ere many  
graphs with compressed or awkward scales, imprecise points (blobs) and poorly -drawn lines  of 
best fit . 
 
  With the x values typically used, some candidates use d a scale based on 15  cm for each large 
square. Although this gives a good spread of points, it is not acceptable as the scale is difficult to 
use. Errors in plotting or reading values from the graph were more common with awkward scales. 
There were many compressed scales on the  y-axis, typically due to candidates including the zero 
value on this scale.  
 
  If candidates identify an anomalous point, they should first check the plotting of that point, then the 
calculation and then, if possible, use the apparatus to repeat the measurements for that point. If 
necessary, a single anomalous point can be indicate d and ignored when drawing the line of best fit.  
 
 (ii) Many candidates were able to draw a straight line of best fit. There w ere many  lines requiring 
rotation to give a good spread of points about  the line. Some lines seem to have been drawn so 
that the maximum number of plotted points were on the line and it appeared that the candidates 
had ignored the points not on the line . Some lines  were drawn to join two points (typically the first 
and last). A significant number of lines were drawn in two sections  so that the line was kinked. 
Candidates should use a transparent non -folding 30  cm ruler to draw a single clear line.  
 
 (iii) Candidates can either draw a triangle on their line or indicate two points on the line used to 
determine the gradient. To avoid confusion  with the plotted points , these points should not be 
indicated with the same symbol as the plotted points . Typical errors were using a small triangle for  
the gradient or reading the intercept value from the y-axis when a false origin was used on the x-
axis. 
 
---PAGE 12---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
  There were cases of incorrect read ings substituted into the gradient calculation, particularly when 
awkward scales were used. A common mistake was to use values from the table for a point that 
was not on the line.  
 
(d)  The majority of candidates transferred their gradient and intercept values as a and b respectively. 
Those with one of these values to only one significant figure in (c) often did not make the required 
correction to two significant figures here. Candidates who considered the units for gradient and 
intercept were usually able to give the correct units. Candidates can ensure that each term in the 
equation has a consistent unit – in this case ax must have the units A–1 so a must be in A–1 m–1 if x 
is given  in m.  
 
(e)  The calculation was usually done correctly by those candidates who in (a) had used current in 
amps and x in metres. It was rare for candidates who had used mA and cm to convert their 
calculated value to have correct units.  
 
Question 2  
 
Most candidates were able to complete this question and to obtain results within the ranges expected, 
despite the difficulties encountered with the small value of the expansion of the pipe and the difficulties of 
dealing with hot water.  
 
(a)  Candidates should be reminded that for answer lines without units they need to consider whether  
units need to be quoted with their value. Although the metre rule can be read to the nearest 0.1  cm, 
the thermometer can only be read to the nearest degree but it was common to see temperatures 
given to 0.1  °C. 
   
(b) (i) A few candidates gave their value of s or d to the nearest centimetre, despite using a metre rule 
with a millimetre scale.  
 
 (ii) Most  T values seen were more than the room temperature recorded in (a) but the T value was well 
below 50  °C in some cases. The Confidential Instructions asked for ‘access to a supply of boiling 
water, e.g. , electric kettle ’; it could be that candidates either took a long time to make their 
measurements or had not realised that they could re -heat the water in the kettle.  
 
 (iii) The common error here was to determine the percentage uncertainty in either H1 or H2 rather than 
(H1 – H2). It was rare to see repeated measurements and the half -range method for determination 
of uncertainty used correctly.  
 
 (iv) The calculation of L was usually correct.   
 
(c) (i) It appeared that a small number of candidates used the same pipe for this part and recorded a 
value of L of about 12  cm again.  
 
 (ii) The small values of ( H1 – H2) made it difficult for candidates with low hot water temperatures to be 
awarded the ‘quality’ mark. Again, it appeared that candidates either took a long time making 
measurements or had not re -heated the water to ensure they were using ‘very hot water ’ as 
instructed in (b)(ii). 
 
(d)  Values of k were usually calculated correctly. In a small number of cases , the value was only given 
to one significant figure, possibly due to rounding of the previous period value. A few  candidates 
used the value of 12  cm for both k values but there were only a few re -arrangement errors.  
 
(e)  Candidates should calculate the percentage difference  between their k values and compare this to 
the suggested percentage uncertainty . There were many clear answers but some vague 
statements such as ‘the percentage uncertainty was less than the percentage uncertainty, so the 
results support the relationship ’. There were also answers showing confusion over the requirement, 
such as: ‘my results do support the relationship as their difference (33%) is close to 30% ’, 
‘percentage difference does not equal 30% so results do not support the relationship ’ or 
‘percentage difference is nowhere near the suggested percentage uncertainty of 30% so results do 
not support the relationship ’. 
 
---PAGE 13---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
  Candidates should give a  numerical comparison with the suggested uncertainty given, in this case 
30%, and a statement such as ‘the percentage difference between my k values is less than the 
suggested percentage uncertainty of 30% so my results support the relationship. ’  
 
(f) (i) Most candidates described four sources of uncertainty or problems, but many suggestions were too 
vague or did not refer to the measurement affected. Difficulty judging the position of the centre of 
the nail needed to be linked to the measurement of s and/or d, for example.  
 
  Many candidates recognised that two sets of data were insufficient to draw a valid conclusion. 
There were also good responses that recognised the problem with measuring  L as the pipe was 
curved and that there were large percentage uncertainties in ( H1 – H2) or L due to the small 
difference between the H values.  
 
  The key to this section is for candidates to identify genuine problems associated with setting up the 
experiment and in obtaining measured values.  
 
 (ii) Most candidates described four improvements but, as with the problems in (i), there were many 
vague answers. There were also many suggestions such as ‘read the ruler at right angles ’, ‘take 
repeat measurements and calculate the average ’ or ‘time multiple rotations of the bob ’ that should 
be standard practice and so will not get credit.  
 
  Stronger candidates were able to suggest taking more sets of readings and plotting a graph and 
taking a video with a timer in view and replaying frame -by-frame.  
   
  Candidates are encouraged to suggest practical solutions that either improve technique or give 
more reliable data. More successful candidates will select relevant problems in (f)(i) and describe 
them clearly, linking to relevant measurements and will then suggest improvements in (f)(ii)  that 
are workable and expressed clearly.  
 
---PAGE 14---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
PHYSICS  
 
 
Paper 9702 /42 
A Level Structured Questions  
 
 
Key messages  
 
• Candidates need to take care to ensure that they read the question properly, understand what is being 
asked and give responses that answer the question that is asked. This is particularly important for 
questions that require extended writing.  Candidates often give answers to questions that were not 
asked, but that have been asked in recent past papers. Candidates should be advised not to rely 
heavily on memorising previous mark schemes.  
 
• It is important that candidates use technical language accurately. Examples of words that are often 
confused by candidates are atom and molecule, nuclide and nucleus, and force and field. Candidates 
are not able to obtain full credit if they use an inappro priate word that makes the response technically 
incorrect.  
 
• In defining quantities, candidates need to take care to ensure that the definition they give is 
dimensionally correct. This often requires use of the phrase ‘per unit’ where the quantity being defined is 
the ratio between two other quantities, or ‘product’  where the quantity being defined is two other 
quantities being multiplied together. Examiners will only consider symbol equations to be part of an 
answer to a question that asks candidates to define a quantity if the symbols in the equation are 
defined.  
 
• Candidates need to be careful that they do not give more than one answer to a question. This is 
particularly important when they are answering a question that asks for the definition of a quantity or the 
meaning of a symbol. These things only have one answer, and if multiple answers are provided that are 
contradictory, the candidate cannot be awarded  credit for a correct answer.  
 
• When answering questions involving calculations, it is important for candidates to show their reasoning 
clearly. This includes taking care to use the correct conventional symbols for physical quantities. If 
working is clear, and based on use of correct phy sics, it is often possible for examiners to award part -
credit even when the final answer is incorrect. Whilst correct final answers will usually be awarded full 
credit, incorrect answers that are not supported by working cannot be awarded any credit.   
 
• Final answers to numerical questions should be given to an appropriate number of significant figures; 
the precision of the data provided in the question is generally indicative of the appropriate number of 
significant figures for an answer. When performing  intermediate calculations within a question, 
candidates should take care to avoid premature rounding that changes the answer within the 
appropriate significant figures; as a general rule, any intermediate calculated values should always carry 
at least one  more significant figure than will be used in the final answer. Candidates should be made 
aware that giving final answers to too few significant figures, and rounding intermediate answers 
prematurely so that final answers become incorrect, can both lead to  full credit not being awarded.  
 
• It would be helpful for candidates to be advised that there is no need to spend time, or to use up answer 
space, by repeating the question.  
  
---PAGE 15---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
General comments  
 
The question paper contained questions of a variety of levels of difficulty, enabling candidates at different 
levels of ability to demonstrate their knowledge and understanding of the subject. Candidates who knew the 
theory , read the questions carefully, took care over their use of technical language and answered the 
questions asked were able  to perform well . 
 
There was no evidence that candidates who were properly prepared for the examination had insufficient time 
in which to complete the paper. Candidates  should be advised that a response should always be attempted, 
because where there is a response examiners may find opportunities to award credit.  
 
Comments on specific questions  
 
Question 1  
 
(a)  A large proportion of candidates thought that centripetal force was one of the two forces acting on 
the sphere. Correct force diagrams were only seen from a small number of candidates. Some 
candidates drew diagrams that included more than two forces.  
 
(b)  Many candidate s answered a different question from the one asked here. The question here was to 
explain how the two forces acting on the sphere result in the acceleration of the sphere being 
centripetal. Examiners were expecting to see discussion of horizontal and vertic al components of 
the normal contact force, that the vertical component balances the weight and that the horizontal 
component is therefore effectively the resultant force that acts towards the centre of the circle.  
Most responses seen made no reference to the two forces acting at all.  
 
(c)  The general equation for acceleration in terms of speed and radius was generally well known . 
Candidates found it more difficult to use the trigonometry involved in getting to the magnitude of the 
resultant force from the weight of the sphere . 
 
(d)  This was the most successfully answered part of Question 1 , with many candidates obtaining the 
correct answer.  
 
(e)  A very common misconception was that the angular frequency must remain unchanged, leading to 
direct proportionality between speed and radius. The candidates who fully appreciated the force 
analysis of the earlier parts of the question realised that the res ultant force, and hence centripetal 
acceleration, cannot change, and thus the correct relationship is that radius is proportional to the 
square of speed.  
 
Question 2  
 
(a)  Candidates who knew the inverse relationship, understood that gravitational potential is always 
negative, and took care over their diagrams, were generally able to achieve the marks.  
 
(b)  Many candidates realised that, at a constant distance from the Earth’s surface, the gravitational 
potential must be constant.  
 
(c)  This question required candidates to realise two things.  One, that the potential is zero at the 
earthed plate and + V at the upper plate. Two, that the electric field between parallel plates is 
uniform. Candidates who realised both aspects , and took care over the start and end points of their 
line, were generally able to achieve the marks.  
 
Question 3  
 
(a) (i) Generally well answered by the stronger candidates.  However, several  misconceptions are worth 
highlighting. Firstly, many candidates appeared to think that ‘constant temperature ’ and ‘equal 
temperatures ’ mean the same thing. Secondly, many candidates confused internal energy and 
thermal energy  and gave  answers that were contradictory . 
 
 (ii) Most candidates knew the general equation for specific heat capacity and were therefore able to 
achieve the first ‘working ’ mark. However, only the strongest candidates correctly analysed the 
energy transfers involved to arrive at the correct answer.  
 
---PAGE 16---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
(b) (i) Many candidates correctly used the equation for work done on a gas when changing volume at 
constant temperature. However, only the strongest candidates realised that, because the gas is 
expanding, the work done on the gas must be negative.  
 
 (ii) Generally well -answered. However, one misconception that was common in a minority of 
candidates, warrants mention. Having correctly stated the starting equation pV = NkT, some 
candidates substituted the change in volume from part (b)(i)  as the value of V. 
 
 (iii) Generally well -answered by the stronger candidates . The common confusion among weaker 
candidates was the difference between r.m.s. speed and mean -square speed. Many candidates 
stopped at the mean -square speed and gave this as their answer to the r.m.s. speed.  
 
Question 4  
 
(a)  Generally well -answered.  
 
(b)  This question was well -answered by the candidates who knew the starting equation.  
 
(c)  Many candidates knew the correct equation for total energy, though various errors were seen in its 
use. These ranged from power -of-ten errors to forgetting which quantities needed to be squared. A 
common e rror from some of the weaker candidates was to use the maximum acceleration value 
from the previous part as the amplitude.  
 
(d) (i) Examiners expected to see reference to an alternating voltage applied across the crystal, making it 
alternately expand and contract. Many candidates confused the concepts of a voltage being 
applied (to cause distortion of the crystal) with a voltage being induced in the crystal by mechanical 
vibrations. Some candidates confused voltage with current.  
 
 (ii) Well-answered by many candidates, with full credit being common. Many other candidates 
calculated the percentage reflected and stopped short of using that value to determine the 
percentage transmitted.  
 
Question 5  
 
(a)  Many candidates were able to correctly reproduce this textbook derivation required by the syllabus.  
Some, however, were not able to establish the key principles of physics as the starting point (how 
the p.d.s and charges relate to each other in a series circuit).  
 
(b)  Many c andidates did not show clarity of presentation in this question, with many conflicting 
expressions alleged to all be expressions for ‘C’. Examiners needed to see a clear expression for 
the total capacitance in terms of C, and a clear statement that the total capacitance is given by the 
gradient of the Q-V graph. Some benefit of doubt was given to candidates who started incorrectly 
but then subsequently arrived at correct physics.  
 
(c) (i) Most candidates knew the equation for time constant, but many then incorrectly substituted 44  μF 
as the capacitance of the circuit. As a result,  2.4 s was a very common incorrect answer. It was 
also notable that a significant number of candidates appeared to not know that time constant is a 
time and  therefore struggled with indicating the correct unit.  
 
 (ii) Generally well -answered by candidates that had a good understanding of the topic of capacitor 
discharge. Full credit by the error -carried -forward principle was common for candidates that worked 
through with their 2.4  s time constant from part (c)(i) . 
 
Question 6  
 
(a)  Many candidates reproduced the algebra involved in this syllabus derivation correctly. However, 
only a minority established the core physics behind the derivation as a starting point, the equality 
between the magnitudes of the electric and magnetic forces.  
 
(b)  This question was generally well -answered, with many candidates successfully calculating the 
correct answer.  
 
---PAGE 17---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
(c)  Many candidates explained  why the particles pass through the field region undeviated, rather than 
addressing the question asked, which focussed on the expression in part (a) and how this 
expression shows that the speed for undeviated path is independent of the mass and charge of the 
particle. Many other candidates, who did address the question asked, gave only one of the factors 
of mass and charge as not appearing in the equa tion, forgetting that both quantities differ between 
protons and alpha particl es. 
 
(d)  Weaker candidates were confused between the current direction and the direction of the electric 
force on the particles. Many candidates, however, gave a correct analysis of the three terms 
involved in the left-hand rule, and full credit was common for the more able candidates.  
 
(e)  Many candidates were unable t o draw the required curve with consistent curvature, and many 
paths were seen that involved a discontinuity in the path at the point of entry into the field region. 
Most candidates had the direction of deflection incorrect, with only the strongest candidat es able to 
deduce that with an unchanged electric force but a larger magnetic force, the faster particles will 
deflect upwards.  
 
Question 7  
 
(a)  Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction was generally well -known, and full credit was common.  
 
(b) (i) A large proportion of the weaker  candidates missed the point of this question and focussed solely 
on the trend of Figure 7.2. The candidate s who were successful in answering this question spotted 
that, whilst Figure 7.2 concerns the relationship between E and t, the question was about the 
relationship between E and v. The starting point for answering correctly required  the direct 
proportionality between v and t to be established from the information that the acceleration of the 
rod is uniform from rest. A significant minority of weaker ca ndidates thought that v was inversely 
proportional to t. 
 
 (ii) This challenging derivation  required candidates to think of the scenario of the rod moving a short 
distance ∆ x in a short time ∆ t. Many candidates conflated t with ∆ t and were thus unable to produce 
a derivation based on correct physics.  
 
 (iii) Generally well -answered, with many candidates obtaining the correct answer. A common mistake 
was for candidates to miss the power -of-ten conversion required in the value of E. 
 
Question 8  
 
(a)  The identity of a photon, as a quantum of energy of electromagnetic radiation, was generally well -
known, although a significant minority of candidates omitted any reference to energy (as the 
quantity that is quantised) in their answer.  
 
(b) (i) Generally well -answered, with correct answers being deduced by many candidates.  
 
 (ii) The stronger  candidates  generally calculated the number of photons per unit time, from the power 
and the photon energy, correctly. A common mistake among some of the weaker  candidates was 
to give an answer that is the reciprocal of the number per unit time. Candidates should consider 
checking whether their numerical answers have a plausible magnitude  to identify errors that have 
been made during the calculation . 
 
 (iii) This was a challenging question. Many candidates successfully got as far as deducing that the 
average force is equivalent to some multiple of the product of the photon energy and the number of 
photons per unit time. However,  many of the candidates were not able to determine  that this 
multiple ha d to be 3/2 from the information about half of the photons being absorbed and half of 
them reflected. Some of the stronger candidates did make this connection, and these candidates 
generally went on to achieve full c redit for the question.  
 
Question 9  
 
(a) (i) The meaning of the random nature of radioactive decay was not well understood. Many candidates  
appeared to  know that it concerned something being unpredictable but could not articulate that this 
unpredictability is to do with when individual nuclei decay. Many candidates appeared to think that 
everything about radioactive decay is unpredictable, which is not c orrect.  
---PAGE 18---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
 
 (ii) This was much more successfully answered, with most candidates knowing that the inability of 
external factors to affect the decay process is the meaning of the term spontaneous.  
 
(b)  Many candidates found it difficult  to give an accurate definition of half -life. The time taken for the 
activity of a sample to halve is the simplest definition to articulate. Candidates who went down the 
number of undecayed nuclei route found it harder to be fully correct in their use of te rminology. 
Responses such as the ‘time for nuclei to halve ’ were common.  
 
(c)  Generally well -answered by candidates who appreciated that the data in the table is for binding 
energy per nucleon . Those who thought they were total binding energies made no use of the 
nucleon number data and just added/subtracted the binding energy per nucleon data. This 
approach was incorrect physics and could not be awarded credit. Some candidates did correctly 
calculate the 7.03 eV figure but then gave a negative answer , presumably just because of the way 
around they performed the subtraction in their calculators. The question did ask for the energy 
released  (not just transferred), and so the sign of the answer has significance , and full credit could 
not be awarded to candidates who thought there was a negative release of energy.  
 
(d) (i) A variety of responses was seen here, but many candidates did correctly deduce that the gradient 
of the line represented the magnitude of the decay constant.  
 
 (ii) Generally well -answered, with many correct answers seen to this question part.  
 
(e) (i) Generally well -answered, with most candidates able to articulate that upon encounter with an 
electron, the positron will undergo annihilation.  
 
 (ii) Many candidates gave responses to this part that hinted towards some aspect  of what examiners 
are looking for, but responses that only dealt with one half of the full answer were common. To be 
awarded credit, candidates needed to establish why 2 hours is both not too long and not too short 
for the half -life of the tracer.   
 
Question 10  
 
(a) (i) Candidates who knew the theory  were generally able to give a full definition of luminosity, as the 
total radiant power of the star.  Many responses were partial answers.  
 
 (ii) Many full and accurate descriptions were seen in response to this question, which directly 
assesses the syllabus learning outcome concerning the use of standard candles to determine 
distances to galaxies. For full credit, candidates needed to establish ho w the information about 
luminosity and radiant flux intensity is established, and then how the equation linking them can be 
used to calculate the distance.  
 
(b) (i) For a relatively challenging ‘show that ’ question, that required various  topics within the syllabus to 
be assembled , this question was well -answered. The candidates  that did compile all the relevant 
physics together, establishing the speed of rotation and the relationship between speed, radius and 
period, generally received  two of the three marks available. For the third mark, all elements of the 
‘show that ’ working needed to be present, and there were some common reasons for not meeting  
the requirements for that mark. One was not showing the working leading to the ∆λ value; one was 
use of the incorrect wavelength in th e Doppler equation; one was omission of the speed of light in 
the working, and the other was not showing how the period is used in the working. Full credit was 
achieved by many candidates.  
 
 (ii) Many candidates incorrectly assert ed that the observed wavelength will be larger due to redshift.  
The stronger candidates realised that point Z on the Sun is moving towards the observer, and 
hence the observed wavelength in this situation will be less than the emitted wavelength.  
 
 (iii) Generally well -answered . 
 
---PAGE 19---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
PHYSICS  
 
 
Paper 9702 /52 
Planning, Analysis and Evaluation  
 
 
Key messages  
 
• In Question 1 , candidates’ responses should include detailed explanations of experimental procedures 
such as how to control variables, how to take measurements and how to analyse the data.  
 
• In Question 2 , candidates need to understand that the number of decimal places in a logarithmic 
quantity should correspond to the number of significant figures.  
 
• The numerical answers towards the end of Question 2  require candidates to show all their working and 
for the values to be correctly evaluated with appropriate units. A full understanding of significant figures 
and the treatment of uncertainties is required.  
 
• The practical skills required for this paper should be developed and practised with a ‘hands -on’ 
approach throughout the course.  
 
 
General comments  
 
In Question 1 , it is advisable that candidates should think carefully about how they would perform the 
experiment in the laboratory using the bullet points given to aid their answer. Planning a few key points 
before answering Question 1  is useful.  
 
Many candidates were successful in the analysis section with clear identification of how the constants could 
be determined. Lower scoring candidates tended to suggest a suitable graph but were not explicit in how the 
relationship could be proved or in how the values of  Y and Z could be determined . To score the additional 
detail marks, candidates should take care to describe exactly how each measurement will be obtained, 
including both the equipment used and the method to take the measurement. It is essential for candidates to 
have experienced pract ical work in preparation for answering this question.  
 
In Question 2 , candidates should be familiar with completing a results table for quantities and their 
uncertainty, and with finding the gradient and y-intercept of a graph. For several candidates, credit was not 
awarded because ; the plotted points were not balanced about the line of best fit , or the worst acceptable line 
did not pass through the error bars correctly , or coordinates were wrongly read off when determining the 
gradient and/or y-intercept.  
 
The recording of the logarithmic quantities in 2(b) and the determination of the absolute uncertainty in 0 in 
2(d)(ii)  were challenging for the candidates. Some candidates were confused by the negative value of the 
gradient.  
 
In question parts requiring mathematical manipulation, higher scoring candidates clearly stated the equation 
used with correct substitution of numbers and then calculated the answer and unit. Candidates should be 
encouraged to set out their working logical ly so that it can be understood.   
 
 
Comments on specific questions  
 
Question 1  
 
Most candidates correctly identified the independent and dependent variables. Candidates should then 
consider the control of variables and to explicitly state the quantities that need to be kept constant to make 
the experiment a fair test. In this experime nt it was expected that candidates would state that V would be 
---PAGE 20---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
kept constant. There was an additional credit for also stating that A, L and q would also be kept constant. 
Credit was not given for stating ‘control’ V since this is just repeating the stem of the question and does not 
indicate what is meant by ‘control’. Some low scoring candidates incorrectly stated that B or p should be kept 
constant.  
 
Candidates were awarded credit for a clearly labelled diagram. Diagrams should be drawn of the workable 
experiment. In this experiment, it was expected that candidates would show the two cylinders correctly 
connected to the resistor and power supply and im portantly indicate where point X was located. Many 
candidates did not draw the cylinders in parallel.   
 
Candidates needed to explain how the potential difference V was determined. High scoring candidates 
correctly drew a voltmeter in parallel with the conductors. The common mistake was to place the voltmeter  in 
parallel with the power supply thus measuring the potential difference across the conductors and the resistor. 
Some high scoring candidates drew a variable resistor in their diagram and then gained an additional credit 
by describing that the resistance of  the variable resistor was adjusted so that V was kept constant. Stating ‘I 
will use a variable resistor to keep V constant ’ does not include enough description.  
 
Candidates also gained credit for stating appropriate measuring instruments to measure L, p and q. 
Apparatus drawn on its own, e.g. , a drawing of a rule , did not gain credit.   
 
Many candidates stated the use of a Hall probe to determine B but did not give the method of measuring B. 
Some suggested that the probe should be at right angles but did not state how this could be checked. There 
were some excellent methods describ ing the rotation of the probe so that a maximum reading was obtained. 
Additional credit was scored for repeating the measurement by reversing the probe and measuring in it in the 
opposite direction and determining the mean. Credit was not gained for just stat ing that the measurement of 
B was repeated and a mean determined.  
 
Many candidates suggested correct axes for a graph. Candidates must explicitly state the quantities to be 
plotted on each axis either in the text or on drawn axes – credit is not given for just writing y = mx + c under 
an expression.   
 
Candidates also needed to explain how the graph would confirm the suggested relationship. Candidates 
need to use the words ‘relationship is valid if’ and the word ‘straight’ to describe the line. In this practical 
credit was not given for stating that the straight line would pass through the origin since there would be a y-
intercept. High scoring candidates often stated the y-intercept that the line would pass through.  Credit was 
not awarded to candidates who did not correctly identify appropriate axes for a graph to plot.  
 
Candidates needed to explain how they would determine a value for the constants Y and Z from the 
experimental results using the gradient and y-intercept. To gain credit, the constants Y and Z had to be the 
subject of the relevant equation. Credit was not awarded to candidates who did not correctly identify 
appropriate axes for a graph to plot .   
 
The additional detail section had a maximum of six marks that could be awarded. Candidates should be 
encouraged to write their plans including appropriate detail; some candidates’ answers suggested that they 
did not have sufficient practical experience. Vague responses were not credited. It is essential that 
candidates’ answers are relevant to the planned experiment rather than general ‘textbook’ rules for working 
in the laboratory. When describing safety precautions, candidates should be encouraged to explain how the 
precaution proposed is relevant to the experiment. In this experiment, it was expected that candidates would 
suggest usin g gloves or switching off the circuit because of the  heating effect  of the current in the cy lindrical 
metal conductors  – the reason for the precaution was needed to gain credit.  
 
Other additional detail which gained credit included a suitable method to determine A, e.g. , the use of a 
micrometer or calipers to measure the diameter of the wire and then an appropriate equation to determine A. 
Some lower scoring candidates did not gain credit for stating that ‘use a micrometer to determine A’ or ‘use a 
micrometer to measure the radius of the wire ’. The physical measurement would be the diameter of the wire 
and then A (and the radius) could be determined. There was additional credit awar ded for stating that the 
measurements of the diameter of the wire would be repeated at different positions along the wire and a 
mean value of diameter would be calculated – just repeating measurements of diameter did not gain credit.  
 
Other additional detail that  gained credit included a detailed method to locate the position of X, additional 
detail of determining p and q by using the edge of the cylinders and the radius or diameter of the cylinders, 
detail on checking that P and Q were parallel and the method to fix Q so that distance q was kept constant.  
 
---PAGE 21---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
Question 2  
 
(a)  Candidates who were mathematically confident were able to work through the algebra and achieve 
credit. Common errors included omitting the ‘ –’ sign. A few lower scoring candidates incorrectly 
wrote ‘ln 0 – R’ as opposed to ‘ln (0 – R)’. Candidates should use the white space on the 
question paper to rearrange the equation into an equation of a straight line.  
 
(b)  The majority of candidates incorrectly calculated ln  (( – R) / °C) to two decimal places. Since  
and R and (0 – R) are all three significant figures, ln  (( – R) / °C) should be recorded to three (or 
four) decimal places. Many candidates correctly calculated the uncertainty in ln  (( – R) / °C). 
Where errors occurred, it was often in not identifying that the uncertainty in (  – R) / °C was  1. 
Candidates need to understand that when adding or subtracting quantities, the absolute 
uncertainties are added.  
 
(c) (i) The data points were straightforward to plot. It is expected that the data point plotted should be 
clearly represented. The plotting needed to be within half a small square. When plotting points, the 
diameter of each point should be less than half a small  square. Candidates need to ensure that the 
error bars are symmetrical about their plotted data point.  
 
 (ii) Most candidates appear to be using a sharp pencil and a transparent 30  cm ruler. For correctly 
plotted data, the line of best fit did not pass through both the highest and lowest points. The worst 
acceptable line was drawn well in general, and many higher candidates drew a line which passed 
through all error bars. Candidates should clearly label the lines drawn as required by the question. 
Clear labelling should also assist candidates when they determine the gradient and y-intercept. 
Where a dashed li ne represents the worst acceptable line, the dashed parts of the line should 
cross each of the error bars.  
 
 (iii) Most candidates clearly demonstrated the points that they used to calculate the gradient. Some 
candidates misread coordinates or did not use a triangle that covered more than half of the drawn 
line. A small number of candidates chose data points that did not lie on the lines, often using data 
from the table that is close to the line instead. Candidates should be encouraged to select two 
points on the line of best fit which are easy to read, i.e. , the points are on grid lines. Some 
candidates did not realise that the gradient was negative.  
 
  When determining the uncertainty in the gradient, candidates need to show their working, including 
the coordinates that they have used from the worst acceptable line and how the uncertainty is 
determined from the gradients of the line of best -fit and the worst acceptable line.  
 
 (iv) The majority of the candidates who  were awarded full credit set out their working clearly. Stronger 
candidates often substituted data from the gradient calculation in (c)(iii)  into y = mx + c. Some 
lower scoring candidates incorrectly read -off the y-intercept when the x-axis reading was 5.0.  
 
  When determining the uncertainty in the y-intercept, candidates needed to show their working 
including both the gradient and a data point from the worst acceptable line. In calculating the 
absolute uncertainty, there must be evidence of subtraction between the y-intercept of the line of 
best fit and the y-intercept of the worst acceptable line. Many candidates incorrectly attempted to 
determine the uncertainty in the y-intercept by  either assuming that the fractional uncertainty in the 
gradient was the same  as the fractional uncertainty in the y-intercept or adding fractional 
uncertainties.  
 
(d) (i) Credit was not gained for substituting data values from the table. Most candidates realised that the 
constant K was equal to – 1 / gradient. Some lower scoring candidates appeared confused by the 
negative signs. Some candidates did not gain credit since they did not give their values of K and 0 
to an appropriate number of significant figures. Most candidates were able to calculate a value for 
0 using the y-intercept. The common error in this question was the determination of units. Most 
candidates  realised that 0 had the unit °C, but many candidates did not understand that K had the 
unit of minute s. The common error was to write min °C-1. Some candidates converted the time to 
seconds which gained credit with the correct unit.  
 
 (ii) This was a  challenging question . To gain credit in this part, a clear method needed to be shown. 
Many candidates incorrectly calculated an answer using a fractional uncertainty. Some candidates 
---PAGE 22---
Cambridge International Advanced Subsidiary and Advanced Level  
9702  Physics  March  2025 
Princip al Examiner Report for Teachers  
 
  © 2025 
realised that the absolute uncertainty was calculated by using the maximum or minimum values. 
However, some of these candidates omitted to include the absolute uncertainty of 0.5 in R. 
 
(e)  It was essential that candidates showed their method of working. High scoring candidates wrote 
down the equation that they chose to use and clearly substituted in their values.  
 